# FallSafe
Every year, there are many patients in hospitals that further injure themselves due to falling down. As hospitals are meant to be for treatment, rather than further damage, it is important for hospitals to seek to provide immediate responses to any incidents that happen. In order to do this, nurses and other personnel must be able to keep tabs on patients, even when not in their presence. However, this is a difficult task, as hospitals do not have the resources to hire people to watch every corner of the building and patients would feel uncomfortable with large security-level cameras around the hospital. One of the best ways that hospitals can fulfill their objective is to simply detect if a patient falls with a smaller camera/sensor (which does not record any videos), while alerting medical personnel so as to provide immediate assistance.
Introducing: Fall Safe, a fall detection system that can be utilized to meet the hospital’s needs. Consisting of a two-device system of a webcam and an alert device, Fall Safe is able to detect a person falling through image analysis techniques and notify medical staff over WiFi. The name Fall Safe is a reference to the common practice of implementing fail-safes, which are an extremely important safety feature in engineering designs. In order to prevent further injury of hospital patients, our device can respond accordingly and mitigate some of the consequences. Although a webcam is unable to prevent an individual from falling, detection is also a valid solution to the problem at hand.
We chose this project because we found it fascinating that a problem that seems so simple to solve has not been solved in a standardized and ubiquitous way. The fact that this is the case results in the medical community incurring severe additional damages to its patients and costs it a ton of money in trying to rectify the situations which are avoidable. In addition after really thinking about it and doing a relatively deep dive we can see how this is a fairly complicated artificial intelligence problem if it is to successfully solve this problem in a reliable way. This is due to the fact that there is no possibility of monitoring the rooms of patients, so the cameras must be able to detect a fall entirely through algorithms. This requires several nontrivial steps including being able to detect a human being and what would qualify as a fall as opposed to regular movement especially given the constraint of operating with a two-dimensional field of view. Although hospital administrations may be resistant to additional expenses, we believe our Fall Safe system would be non-invasive and cost-efficient enough for them to consider installing them, even down the line with improved hardware and algorithms. The cost of the infrastructure required to run an advanced version of what we are trying to start will no doubt be orders of magnitude less than the costs incurred by not having our systems in place, both monetarily and otherwise. Furthermore, both of us were interested in image processing and thought it would be cool to implement an algorithm that could detect a person falling with a high success rate. Additionally this presents an opportunity to get creative with our solution which will no doubt incorporate image processing as a primary component of fall detection, but allows for the potential to explore other solutions incorporating the use of accelerometers or mechanical vibration detection.
## Dependencies
OpenCV, OpenPose, Keras
## Authors
Rohan Anthony
Rami Jaber
## Acknowledgements
Ilya Mikhelson
